# THE ART OF 3D COMPUTER ANIMATION AND EFFECTS

# Content
```
Section 1. Introduction
    Chapter 1: Animation, Visual Effects, and Technology in Context
        * 1.1 A Digital Creative Environment
        * 1.2 The Development of the Technology
        * 1.3 Visual Milestones: 1960-1989
        * 1.4 Visual Milestones: 1990-1999
        * 1.5 Visual Milestones: 2000-Today
        * 1.6 Timeline Charts
```

# Preface
* The FOURTH EDITION OF THIS BOOK includes many updates and additions that address the new professional realities faced by three-dimensional computer animators, techhnical directors, and visual effect artists. A lot has changed in this field since this book was first published in 1996. Many of these changes have transformed a field that began as a specialized novelty into a mainstream and mature profession.
* Consider the multiple landmark events that have taken place during the first decade of the 21st century. Desktop computers and graphics cards dominate today the production of computer animation, a world previously ruled by high-end (and high-priced) workstations. Computer networks and the Internet, including the development of streaming video on the World Wide Web, have also become ubiquitous during this period. The number of live-action feature films with significant, often stunning, three dimensional computer animation and visual effects has multiplied. The high power graphics capabilities of today's game consoles are capable of rendering in real time very sophisticated imagery. high definition digital video is a feasible means of moving production, and all digital cinema continues to evolve. The quality of work produced by computer animation and film-making students continues to rise worldwide, with student short films winning countless prestigious awards. Computers are used for virtually every single animated movie, game, or TV series produced today, and it seems like the first all-computer-animated movie, game, or TV series produced today, and it seems like the first all-computer-animated feature film was produced a long time ago, before some of this book's readers were born. 
* Some of the new material that you will find in the book includes:

        * Additional new pages focusing on creative development, story, visual style, and characters.
        * Information on new production pipelines
        * An expanded version of the popular historical timeline of computer animation, visual effects, and technology, including the recent years.
        * over 300 new color images with informative captions, including first-time contributions from Australia, Croatia, Czech, Finland, India, Israel, Hollywood studios, and production houses and independents in Belgium, Canada, China, Denmark, England, France, Germany, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Norway, Poland Spain, Switzerland, and the United States.
        * New animation principles of anime
        * Updated animation chapters with a focus on blending the traditional animation principles with the digital crafts
        * Countless tips on how to improve the artistic and technical quality of your projects.
        * Updated technical information on the latest stylistic trends and techniques.
        * An updated website at ***www.artof3d.com** containing parts of the book that are available only online, such as the much-read Ten Tips for Digital Artists, and other useful resources.

## Scope of this book
* It would require an encyclopedic work to fully document and present all of the topics and techiques included in this subject. This book does not pretend to be such a work. A significant effort has been made to create a book that is not bound by the particulars of any specific computer program while, at the same time, offers detailed, practical information that goes beyond merere theory. The knowledge contained in this book has been distilled from years of production experience, working and teaching with a variety of software programs, from reading innumerable software manuals, and from practicing and making mistakes. Hopefully, reading this book will help minimize the number of mistakes you make and provide you with the tools to gracefullly recover from them. Welcome to artistic production.

## How to Read this Book
* Mastering the art and craft of three-dimensional computer animation and effects can be achieved in different ways. Likewise, this book can be read in multiple ways.
* For those of you who like the systematic approach I recommend that you read the book from front to back in sequential order, and refer to the illustrations to complement the knowledge presented in the main body of the text.
* for those of you who prefer to learn by doing or are too impatient to read the whole book from start to end, it might be best to look at the picture first. But do not forget to read the captions as you look at the images. There is a lot of useful information contained in them. You might want to read some of the sections in the book that complement the step-by-step procedures that you can find in your software manual. This book contains information rarely found in manuals or presented by instructors in lab courses. This information is more important than it seems at first because it will help you make the transition from being just a technician (AKA button-pusher) in the software program of your choice to being a creative digital animator or artist.

## using this book with Software
* Read the book as you learn and experiment with a specific three-dimensional program or by itself without any hands-on work. To those of you who prefer to learn by reading before you start the hands-on part of learning, this book offers a comprehensive introduction with plenty of theoretical and practice references. Those of you who prefer diving straight into the particulars of a specific computer program--and reading after the fact--will find this book complements your experimental approach by offering clear explanations in a succinct form. Last but not least, to those of you who learn best by combining the experimental approach with conceptual comprehension, this book offers a logical progression of topics that goes beyond the particulars of software manual.

## Book Format
* This book consists of five sections, each with several chapters. The first section includes a historical overview and general creative development and production issues. This section deals with a summary of the major creative and technical trends, a short summary of computer animation and visual effects milestones, and advice regarding the production planning of a project. The introductory section makes you think like a historian, film critic, and producer. Section II goes right into the details of modeling three-dimensional objects and environments. The modeling section makes you think like a sculptor. Section III covers many of the most useful rendering techniques, both simple and complex. The rendering section makes you think like a photographer and painter. The fourth section deals first with many of the issues associated with telling a story through performance, moving pictures and visual effects: basic screenplay writing, storyboarding, and acting techniques for bringing an animated character to life. The animation section makes you think like an actor, a scriptwriter, and a cinematographer. The last section presents issues involved in recording and presenting your work, including sequencing and composing. This section makes you think like an editor and a magician who pulls off the trick right in front of the audience.

## What to Expect from this Book
* This book seeks to inspire and to inform. It presents the concepts required to understand the steps and procedures that lead to the completion of a film, rendered three-dimensional computer animation. Many of illustrations have been developed to present complex concepts in a way that is clear and easy to understand. Considerable effort has also been made so that the book structure and details would be as inclusive as possible: many software programs and hardware platforms were tested and reviewed so that readers find a consistent treatment and point of view. The main goal of this book is to provide the reader with a solid foundation by presenting a unique and unusual combination of technique and creativity.

## What Not to Expect from this Book
* This book is not a computer software manual. It is not based on a particar software program. Readers who seek information regarding the detailed operation of specific software or the implementation of specific techniques are advised to consult software manuals. This book is not a general introduction to the use of computers. it is assumed that the reader is already familiar with the basic use of a computer system, or that the reader is in the process of gaining that knowledge elsewhere. Readers who have used computers and who have a basic understanding of the operation of computer systems and are likely to benefit from this book faster than readers who have never before used a computer.

## About Software Manuals
* Software manuals are sometimes tedious to follow and they become obsolete in a flash. The latter is not surprising if we take into account the complexity of software, the constant upgrades of features, adn short production cycles to develop the software and relevant manuals, and turning them into functional and efficient products within a competitive market.
* Having been both a user and a writer of software user manuals I am familiar with the frustrations experienced by both sides. Today's three-dimensional software is so complex and changing that we can not expect a manual to have every single pice of information perfectly digested and updated. My advice is to take the useful information contained in the software manuals and build on it. Some of the nuts and bolts information required to be a proficient digital animator and technician is found in manuals. Some is acquired through practice, trial, and error, or from reading books and magazines and consulting with individuals more experienced than oneself. Learning requires effort.

## General Principles vs. Specific Techniques
* Most of the techniques described throughout the book are available in most of the three-dimensional software programs available on the market. But instead of presenting these modeling, rendering, animation, and output techniques in exactly the same ways they are implemented in a specific computer system, we present them by focusing on their essential features and capabilities. Specific implementations of techniques--implementations that differ from system to system--are left untouched. Readers who wish to obtain highly specific information regarding a particular computer program mentioned in this book are advised to consult their specific software reference manuals.

SECTION I: INTRODUCTION

# Chapter I: Animation and Visual Effects in Context
Summary
* The brief historical information presented here provides readers with a simple context in which to frame technique and stylistic discussion related to three-dimensional computer animation and visual effects. A summary of events and projects that contributed to the creative and technical development of three-dimensional computer animation and digital visual effects techniques is presented in this chapter.

## 1.1 A Digital Creative Environment
* More than ever before computers have become part of our life, especial part of our creative, production, and professional lives. They can be found everywhere: they coordinate the flow of information in our banking transaction, they digitize our voices and filter the noise in telephone conversations, they control the fuel injection system in our cars, and they adjust the setting in photograhpic and video cameras so that image quality is always optimal. Most of the job in the visual professions and trades today require some degree of computer competency. Much of the broadcasting, manufacturing, graphic arts, and entertainment industries have computerized their production. Likewise, many independent artists and design studios develop their work with computers and often deliver it in digital formats.
* The transition to increased reliance on computer system affects many creators and technicians. Large numbers of established visual professionals have retrained to acquire new skills, and young students are eager to learn the secrets and shortcuts. Expectations range from the sensible to the ridiculous. Those who resist the change altogether, for example, are left behind because the world of animation production is changing. Those who are overly enthusiastic often have unrealistic expectations. By finding a balance we can accept the advantages that computer technology has to offer while retaining and developing the knowledge that we inherited from traditional practitioners.
* Much of today's creation and production of images is indeed performeed with the aid of computers. Increasingly, professionals from a wide variety of visual disciplines are working with **digital information**. Some of the traditional visual practices based on drawing, painting, photography, and video techniques are merging with **digitial imaging techniques**. A creative environment that used to exist as a collection of totally separate and unrelated disciplines--each with its own tools, techniques, and media--is turning into an environment where visual people use tools and techniques that cross over different media. As a result some of the traditional barriers between visual disciplines no longer have to exist. There is now, for example, great overlap between the fields of animation, graphic arts, broadcasting, and film. The creative **digital environment** has fostered this overlap because computer technology often provides more creative power to visual people. Decades ago, for example, visual professionals used to purchase tools specialized for their professions. These tools were useful for doing the work in their field, but not in others. A photographer, for example, would use a photographic camera to capture reality on film, and a traditional animator would use a pencil and light table to create animated sequences of drawing on paper. Today's photographer and animators, as well as many other creative professionals, share the computer as the tool--loaded with specialized software--to carry on each of their unique tasks.

#### Animation and Effects in the Predigital Days
* For many of us it is difficult to imagine today that only a few decades ago all animation, effects, and entertainment in general was made, distributed, and consumed without any type of computer or digital technology. But this was the case even a few decades ago. One of the first fully three-dimensional computer animated independent shorts, John lasseter's Luxo Jr., was released in 1986, and the first fully three-dimensional computer animated feature film, Pixar's Toy Story, was released in 1995.
* As we experiment with new modeling, rending, and animation techniques it is also worthwhile to remember the innovation of many of the animation and those who pioneered the use of experimental methods such as collage, cutouts, wax, pinhead shadow, object, and abstract painting animation. Among the former we count the New York and Hollywood animators who devlier gag after gag and amused audiences with the likes of Popeye, Woody Woodpecker, Bugs Bunny, Tom and Jerry, and Mickey Mouse. These animators include **Max Fleischer, Walt Disney, Walter Lantz, Tex Avery, Friz Freleng, Chuck Jones,** and the many talented animators who worked alongside them in their studios. Among the experimental animators we count the French Leopold Survage and Alexander Alexeieff; the Germans Hans Richter, Oskar Fischinger, and Lotte Reininger; the Canadian Norman Mclaren; and the American Claire Parker and John Witney, Sr. The classic Disney animated movies that popularized the genre were created in the late 1930s and 1940s. The well-known twelve principles of animation covered in Chapter 10 were also developed by Disney animators during the same time period, fifty years before computer animation started to be used in their animation studios.
* As we seek to invent new digital visual effects it is refreshing to remember that in 1939 Hollywood's Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) created the Special Effects category in their awards competition. Between 1964 and 1971 the category was renamed Special Visual Effects, and between 1972 and 1976 the category of visual effects was renamed as Special Achievement Award, one not necssarily given in a particular year. Since then the category has mostly been called Visual Effects. Winners between 1939 and 2003 are listed in the timelines at the end of this chapter.
* If we go back a bit further, just to put three-dimensional computer animation in perspective, we find out that the first kinetoscope parlor opened in New York City in 1894, 101 years before the release of Toy Story. This event was the result of the work of Thomas Alva Edison and his assistant William K. Dickinson to improve the devices for creating images in motion and, above all, the simultaneous recording of sound and motion. Edison and his assistant developed the **kinetoscope**--which means "viewing in motion"" in Greek--a closed box in which 50 feet of looped film could be viewed through an opening. The few kinetoscope equipped with earphones to hear simultaneous music were called kinetophones. A few years later on the other side of the Atlantic, during the 1900 Paris Exhibition, a mechanical platform gently rocked by a steam machine presented riders with panoramic views of real and imaginary scenes of the world. These panoramic rides so popular at the turn of the nineteenth century are clearly the ancestors of virtual rides and location-based entertainment. In retrospect it is clear that the kinetoscope spawned many other film viewing and projection system that fueled the growth of the **seventh art**, cinema, and its animation cousin.

SKIP

SECTION II: Modeling

# Chapter 3: Modeling Concepts

## Summary
* The SCULPTING, SPATIAL DESCRIPTION, AND PLACEMENT of virtual three-dimensional objects, environments, and scenes with a computer system is called modeling. This chapter explores the basic concepts of the modeling process, including the numerical description of objects, moving and resizing objects in three-dimensional space, popular file formats, and some practical advice.

## 3.1. Space, Objects, and Structures
* We live in a three-dimensional world. We move among other people, climb mountain, run on the beach, and admire the landscape around use. We go in and out of buildings, walk up and down the stairs, drive through bridges,and grab utensils for writing, cooking, and grooming ourselves. Our daily life happens in three-dimensional environment and is full of three-dimensional objects and characters.We see and feel three-dimensionality all the time. But unless we are involved in an activity or profession that is related to building things, like silverware or furniture, buildings or bridges, we rarely concern ourselves with how our three-dimensional reality is put together and what techniques are used to building it.
* Modeling three-dimensional scenes with a computer program requires that we familiarize ourselves with the large selection of computer software tools used for modeling objects and environments. In 3D computer modeling it is quite common to use a combination of  tools for building jsut one object. For example, think of the difference between a chair that was built using just two tools--a manual saw and a hammer--and a chair that was built with six tools--a thick saw, a thin saw, a lathe, a curve chisel, a hammer, and a sanding tool. It is obvious that while the first chair could have an interesting design, the variety of shapes would be limited and directly related to the skill of the artisan. The second chair would have richer and more refined modeling. The simple conputer-based modeling tools are described in this chapter, and most of the advanced modeling tools are covered in Chapter 4. Now let's step back and talk about some general issues involved in modeling in 3D.
* Many of the basic conventions used in 3D modeling software describing 3D scenes are based on the traditional convensions used in various disciplines. For example, to convey space in a clear and concise way, architects use conventions related to measuring, composition, and sequence. Even the design of a simple rectangular room requires measuring many times so that all the components of the room end up where they were planned to be. Furthermore, to interpret accurately an architect's drawing and build it, masons need to take measurements. Over the ages masons and architects have developed conventions so that they can be precise and clear about measuring spaces, building objects, and arranging them in structures.
* We use similar conventions to describe the dimension, placement, and sequence of objects and environments in a 3D space simulated with a computer program. A beginning builder will soon find out that there are many different methods available for measuring space, and at first this variety can be confusing. But experienced builders ususally find this richness of methods empowering and have the option of using one or another depending on the requirements of the project. Let's start our definition of 3D space with the boundaries that define our workspace or scene. The simplest way to do this is to imagine that we are working inside a large space like a cube or a sphere. We can think of this space as our world or environment. Objects that exist within the space are visible, those that fall out are invisible.
* The main point of reference in the world is called the world origin. The origin is usually located in the center of the space, but it can also be placed or repositioned elsewhere depending on the modeling needs and strategies. For example, if we were building a model of the solar system, it would make sense to have the world origin where the sun is, in the centre, because all the other objects in the system are placed around the sun, and can be easily described in terms of the sun. If we were building an underwater scene and included both fish under the water and boats above the water, we might want to position the origin at the point where air and water meet. In the case of 3D modeli of an airport, the world origin could be placed at ground level, matching the position of the control tower. All 3D spaces have three basic dimensions: width, height, depth. A common method for representing these dimensions in a 3D space is by using arrows or axes. It is common to label the axis representing the width of a 3D space with the letter X, the height axis with letter Y, and the depth axis with the letter Z. The point in space where these three axes intersect, or cross each other, is the world origin.
* The **rectangular coordinate system** can be used to define specific locations and accurately position the points of objects in 3D space. Rene Descartes, an eighteenth-century French philosopher and mathematician, formalized the idea of using three axes labeled X, Y, and Z, to represent the dimensios in 3D space. The coordinate system he devised is commonly referred to as the Cartesian (or rectangular) coordinate system. Each axis in the system can be divided into many units of measurement. In principle these units are abstract values that can represent different units of measurement and scales of dimension. On each axis the values to one side of the origin are positive, and the values on the other side are negative. 
* There are many ways of representing the direction of an axis and, consequently, the directions in which values on that axis are positive or negative. usually though, in what is called a **right-handed coordinate system**, the values of the X axis become larger to the right of the origin, the values of the Y axis increase as they move above the origin, and the value on the Z axis grow as they get closer to us. In the **left-handed coordinate system** the value on the Z axis decrease as they get closer to us. There are several variations of the directionality of the rectangular coordinate system, but most 3D modeling programs use the right-handed coordinate system to describe the virtual world.
* The thre axes in the 

page 3